This is a LibriVox recording. All LibriVox recordings are in the public domain. For more
information or to find out how you can volunteer, please visit LibriVox.org.
THE PICTURE OF DORIAN GREY
CHAPTER VIII
When his servant entered, he looked at him steadfastly, and wondered if he had thought
of peering behind the screen. The man was quite impassive and waited for his orders.
Dorian lit a cigarette and walked over to the glass and glanced into it. He could see
the reflection of Victor's face perfectly. It was like a placid mask of servility. There
was nothing to be afraid of there, yet he thought it best to be on his guard. Speaking
very slowly, he told him to tell the housekeeper that he wanted to see her, and then to go
to the frame-makers and ask him to send two of his men round at once. It seemed to him
that as the man left the room he peered in the direction of the screen, or was that only
his fancy?
After a few moments Mrs. Leaf, a dear old lady in a black silk dress with a photograph
of the late Mr. Leaf framed in a large gold brooch at her neck, and an old-fashioned
thread mittens on her wrinkled hands bustled into the room.
Well, Master Dorian, she said, what can I do for you? I beg your pardon, sir. Here came
a courtesy. I shouldn't call you Master Dorian any more, but, Lord bless you, sir, I have
known you since you were a baby. And many's the trick you've played on poor old Leaf.
Not that you are not always a good boy, sir, but boys will be boys, Master Dorian, and
jam is a temptation to the young, isn't it, sir?' He laughed.
"'You must always call me Master Dorian, Leaf. I will be very angry with you if you don't.
And I assure you I am quite as fond of jam now as I used to be. Only when I am asked
out to tea I am never offered any. I want you to give me the key of the room at the
top of the house.'
"'The old school-room, Master Dorian? Why, it's full of dust. I must get it arranged
and put straight before you get into it. It is not fit for you to see, Master Dorian.
It is not, indeed. I don't want it put straight. Leaf, I only want the key.'
"'Well, Master Dorian, you'll be covered with cobwebs if you goes into it. Why, it hasn't
been open for nearly five years, not since his lordship died.'
He winced at the mention of his dead uncle's name. He had hateful memories of him.
"'That does not matter, Leaf,' he replied. All I want is the key.'
"'And here is the key, Master Dorian,' said the old lady, after going over the contents
of a bunch with tremulously uncertain hands. Here is the key. I'll have it off the ring
in a moment, but you don't think of living up there, Master Dorian, and you're so comfortable
here.'
"'No, Leaf, I don't. I merely want to see the place, and perhaps store something in it.
That is all. Thank you, Leaf. I hope your rheumatism is better. And mind you, send me
up jam for breakfast.' Mrs. Leaf shook her head. Them foreigners don't understand jam,
Master Dorian. They calls it compot. But I'll bring it to you myself some morning, if you
lets me.'
"'That will be very kind of you, Leaf,' he answered, looking at the key, and having
made him an elaborate courtesy, the old lady left the room, her face wreathed in smiles.
She had a strong objection to the French valet. It was a poor thing, she felt, for anyone
to be born a foreigner. As the door closed, Dorian put the key in his pocket and looked
round the room. His eye fell on a large purple satin coverlet heavily embroidered with gold,
a splendid piece of late seventeenth-century Venetian work that his uncle had found in
a convent near Bologna. Yes, that would serve to wrap the dreadful thing in. It had perhaps
served often as a pall for the dead. Now it was to hide something that had a corruption
of its own, worse than the corruption of death itself, something that would breed horrors
and yet would never die.
What the worm was to the corpse, his sins would be to the painted image on the canvas.
They would mar its beauty and eat away its grace. They would defile it and make it shameful.
And yet the thing would still live on. It would always be alive.
He shuddered, and for a moment he regretted that he had not told Basil the true reason
why he had wished to hide the picture away. Basil would have helped him to resist Lord
Henry's influence, and the still more poisonous influences that came from his own temperament,
the love that he bore him, for it was really love, had something noble and intellectual
in it. It was not that merely physical admiration of beauty that is born of the senses and that
dies when the senses tire. It was such a love as Michelangelo had known, and Montaigne and
Winkleman and Shakespeare himself. Yes, Basil could have saved him, but it was too late
now.
The past could always be annihilated. Regret, denial, or forgetfulness could do that. But
the future was inevitable. There were passions in him that would find their terrible outlet,
dreams that would make the shadow of their evil real.
He took up from the couch the great purple and gold texture that covered it, and, holding
it in his hands, passed behind the screen. Was the face on the canvas viler than before?
It seemed to him that it was unchanged, and yet his loathing of it was intensified. Gold
hair, blue eyes, and rose-red lips, they all were there. It was simply the expression that
had altered. That was horrible in its cruelty. Compared to what he saw in it of censure or
Basil's reproaches about Sibyl Vane had been, how shallow, and of what little account. His
own soul was looking out at him from the canvas and calling him to judgment. A look of pain
came across him, and he flung the rich pall over the picture. As he did so, a knock came
to the door. He passed out as his servant entered.
The persons are here, monsieur. He felt that the man must be got rid of at once. He must
not be allowed to know where the picture was being taken to. There was something sly about
him, and yet thoughtful, treacherous eyes. Sitting down at the writing-table, he scribbled
a note to Lord Henry, asking him to send round something to read, and reminding him that
they were to meet at eight-fifteen that evening.
"'Wait for an answer,' he said, handing it to him, and, "'Show the men in here.' In two
or three minutes there was another knock, and Mr. Ashton himself, the celebrated frame-maker
of South Audley Street, came in with a somewhat rough-looking young assistant. Mr. Ashton
was a florid red-whiskered little man, whose admiration for art was considerably tempered
by the inveterate impeccuinosity of most of the artists who dealt with him. As a rule,
he never left his shop. He waited for people to come to him, but he always made an exception
in favour of Dorian Gray. There was something about Dorian that charmed everybody. It was
a pleasure even to see him.
"'What can I do for you, Mr. Gray?' he said, rubbing his fat freckled hands.
"'I thought I would do myself the honour of coming round in person. I have just got
a beauty of a frame, sir, picked it up at a sale, old Florentine. Came from Fontill,
I believe. Admirably suited for a religious picture, Mr. Gray. I'm sorry you have given
yourself the trouble of coming round, Mr. Ashton. I will certainly drop in and look
at the frame, though I don't go in much for religious art, but to-day I only want a picture
carried to the top of the house for me. It is rather heavy, so I thought I would ask
you to lend me a couple of your men.'
"'No trouble at all, Mr. Gray. I am delighted to be of any service to you. Which is the
work of art, sir?'
"'This,' replied Dorian, moving the screen back.
"'Can you move it, covering it all, just as it is? I don't want it to get scratched
going upstairs.'
"'There will be no difficulty, sir,' said the genial frame-maker, beginning, with the
aid of his assistant, to unhook the picture from the long brass chain by which it was
suspended. And now where shall we carry it to, Mr. Gray? I will show you the way, Mr.
Ashton. Perhaps you better go in front. I am afraid it is right at the top of the house.
You will go up at the front staircase, as it is wider.'
He held the door open for them, and they passed out into the hall and began the ascent. The
elaborate character of the frame has made the picture extremely bulky. And now and then,
in spite of the obsequious protests of Mr. Ashton, who had a true tradesman's dislike
of seeing a gentleman do anything useful, Dorian put his hand to it so as to help them.
"'Something of a load to carry, sir,' gasped the little man, when they reached the top
landing, and he wiped his shiny forehead.
"'A terrible load to carry,' murmured Dorian, as he unlocked the door that opened into the
room that was to keep for him the curious secret of his life and hide his soul from
the eyes of men.
"'He had not entered the place for more than four years. Not, indeed, since he had used
it first as a playroom when he was a child, and then as a study when he grew somewhat
older. It was a large, well-proportioned room which had been specially built by the last
Lord Sherrod, for the use of the little nephew whom, being himself childless, and perhaps
for other reasons, he had always hated and desired to keep at a distance. It did not
appear to Dorian to have much changed. There was the huge Italian casson with its fantastically
painted panels and its tarnished gilt mouldings, in which he had so often hidden himself as
a boy. There was a satin-wood bookcase filled with his dogged school books. On the wall
behind it was hanging the same ragged Flemish tapestry where a faded king and queen were
playing chess in a garden while a company of hawkers rode by carrying hooded birds on
their gauntleted wrists. How well he recalled it all! Every moment of his lonely childhood
came back to him as he looked round. He remembered the stainless purity of his boyish life, and
it seemed horrible to him that it was here that the fatal portrait was to be hidden away.
How little he had thought in those dead days of all that was in store for him! But there
was no other place in the house so secure from prying eyes as this. He had the key,
and no one else could enter it. Beneath its purple pall, the face painted on the canvas
could grow bestial, sodden and unclean. What did it matter? No one could see it. He himself
would not see it. Why should he watch the hideous corruption of his soul? He kept his
youth, that was enough. And besides, might not his nature grow finer after all? There
was no reason that the future should be so full of shame. Some love might come across
his life and purify him, and shield him from those sins that seemed to be already stirring
in spirit and in flesh, those curious unpictured sins whose very mystery lent them their subtlety
and their charm. Perhaps, some day, the cruel look would have passed away from the scarlet's
sensitive mouth, and he might show to the world Basil Hallward's masterpiece. No, that
was impossible. The thing upon the canvas was growing old, hour by hour and week by
week. Even if it escaped the hideousness of sin, the hideousness of age was in store for
it. The cheeks would become hollow or flaccid. The yellow crow's feet would creep round the
brightness. The mouth would gape, droop, would be foolish or gross as the mouths of
old men are. There would be the wrinkled throat, the cold, blue-veined hands, the twisted body
that he remembered in the uncle who had been so stern to him in his boyhood. The picture
had to be concealed. There was no help for it.
"'Bring it in, Mr. Ashton, please,' he said, wearily, turning around.
"'I'm sorry I kept you so long. I was thinking of something else.'
"'Always glad to have a rest, Mr. Grey,' answered the frame-maker, who was still gasping
for breath. "'Where shall we put it, sir?'
"'Oh, anywhere. Here, this will do. I don't want to have it hung up. Just lean it against
the wall. Thanks. Might one look at the work of art, sir?' Dorian started.
"'It would not interest you, Mr. Ashton,' he said, keeping his eye on the old man. He
felt ready to leap on him and fling him to the ground if he dared to lift the gorgeous
hanging that concealed the secret of his life.
"'I won't trouble you any more now. I am much obliged for your kindness in coming round.'
"'Not at all, not at all, Mr. Grey. Ever ready to do anything for you, sir?'
And Mr. Ashton trapped downstairs, followed by the assistant, who glanced back at Dorian
with a look of shy wonder in his rough, uncomely face. He had never seen anyone so marvellous.
When the sound of their footsteps had died away, Dorian locked the door and put the key
in his pocket. He felt safe now. No one would ever look on the horrible thing. No eye but
his would ever see his shame.
On reaching the library he found that it was after five o'clock, and that the tea had already
been brought up. On a little table of dark-perfumed wood thickly encrusted with nakra, a present
from his guardian's wife, Lady Radley, who had spent the preceding winter in Cairo, was
lying a note from Lord Henry, and beside it was a book bound in yellow paper, the cover
slightly torn and the edges soiled. A copy of the third edition of St. James's Gazette
had been placed on the tea-tray. It was evident that Victor had returned. He wondered if he
had met the men in the hall as they were leaving the house, and had wormed out of them what
they had been doing. He would be sure to miss the picture, had no doubt missed it already
while he had been laying the tea-things. The screen had not been replaced, and the blank
space on the wall was visible. Perhaps some night he might find him creeping upstairs
and trying to force the door of the room. It was a horrible thing to have a spy in
one's house. He had heard of rich men who had been blackmailed all their lives by some
servant who had read a letter, or overheard a conversation, or picked up a card with an
address, or found beneath a pillow a withered flower, or a bit of crumpled lace. He sighed,
and having poured himself out some tea, opened Lord Henry's note. It was simply to say that
he sent him round the evening paper and a book that might interest him, and that he
would be at the club at eight fifteen. He opened the St. James's Langwoodly and looked
through it. A red pencil mark on the fifth page caught his eye. He read the following
paragraph.
Inquest on an Actress
An inquest was held this morning at the Bell Tavern, Hoxton Road, by Mr. Danby, the District
Coroner, on the body of Sybil Vane, a young actress recently engaged at the Royal Theatre
Holburne.
A verdict of death by misadventure was returned. Considerable sympathy was expressed for the
mother of the deceased, who was greatly affected during the giving of her own evidence, and
that of Dr. Birel, who had made the post-mortem examination of the deceased. He frowned slightly,
and tearing the paper in two, went across the room and flung the pieces into a gilt
basket. How ugly it all was, and how horribly real ugliness made things! He felt a little
annoyed with Lord Henry for having sent him the account, and it was certainly stupid of
him to have marked it with a red pencil. Victor might have read it. The man knew more than
enough English for that. Perhaps he had read it, and had begun to suspect something.
And?
And yet what did it matter? What had Dorian Gray to do with Sybil Vane's death? There
was nothing to fear. Dorian Gray had not killed her. His eye fell on the yellow book that
Lord Henry had sent him. What was it, he wondered?
He went towards the little pearl-coloured octagonal stand that had always looked to
him like the work of some strange Egyptian bees who rotten silver, and took the volume
up. He flung himself into an arm-chair and began to turn over the leaves. After a few
minutes he became absorbed. It was the strangest book he had ever read.
It seemed to him that in exquisite raiment and to the delicate sound of flutes the sins
of the world were passing in dumb show before him. Things that he had dimly dreamed of were
suddenly made real to him. Things of which he had never dreamed were gradually revealed.
It was a novel without a plot, and with only one character being, indeed, simply a psychological
study of a certain young Parisian who spent his life trying to realise in the nineteenth
century all the passions and modes of thought that belonged to every century except his
own, and to sum up, as it were, in himself the various moods through which the world's
spirit had ever passed, loving, for their mere artificiality, those renunciations that
men had unwisely called virtue, as much as those natural rebellions that wise men still
call sin. The style in which it was written was that curious jeweled style, vivid and
obscure at once, full of argot and archaisms, of technical expressions and of elaborate
paraphrases that characterises the work of some of the finest artists of the French school
of decadence. There were in it metaphors as monstrous as orchids and as evil in colour.
The life of the senses were described in the terms of mystical philosophy. One hardly knew
at times whether one was reading the spiritual ecstasies of some medieval saint or the morbid
confessions of a modern sinner. It was a poisonous book. The heavy odour of incense seemed to
cling about its pages and to trouble the brain. The mere cadence of the senses, the subtle
monotony of their music, so full, as it was, of complex refrains and movements elaborately
repeated, produced in the mind of the lad, as he passed from chapter to chapter, a form
of reverie, a malady of dreaming, that made him unconscious of the falling day and the
creeping shadows. Cloudless and pierced by one solitary star, a copper-green sky gleamed
through the windows. He read on by its one light till he could read no more. Then, after
his valet had reminded him several times of the lateness of the hour, he got up, and going
into the next room placed the book on the little Florentine table that always stood
at his bedside, and began to dress for dinner. It was almost nine o'clock before he reached
the club, where he found Lord Henry sitting alone in the morning-room, looking very bored.
"'I am so sorry, Harry,' he cried, "'but really it is entirely your fault. That book
you sent me so fascinated me, I forgot what the time was.'
"'I thought you would like it,' replied his host, rising from his chair.
"'I didn't say I liked it, Harry, I said it fascinated me. There is a great difference.'
"'Ah, if you have discovered that, you have discovered a great deal,' murmured Lord Henry,
with his curious smile. "'Come, let us go into dinner. It is dreadfully late, and I am afraid
the champagne will be too much iced.' End of chapter eight of the picture of Dorian
Grey